All right.
So in the last lesson, we learned how to sort items in a list using the list Typekit sort method where
we are able to pass in a comparator.
We also learned a couple of basic ways to create a comparator kind of in line by first using an anonymous
class and then letting the ADC also convert that anonymous class directly into a lambda expression for
us, which are both more or less functionally equivalent.
I've made a pun there, functional.
If you don't know about functional programming, you won't get that joke, and it's probably not a very
good joke.
But anyway, I want to show you a couple of other things about being able to sort lists in that way
before we jump into another approach to sorting lists.
So a couple of little things I want to show you.
Turning to the ADC, let me minimize this really quickly.
So first thing I want to show you is a little peek into how this sort method of the list and in this
case, it'll be the sort method of the ArrayList class, right?
Because list is just an interface.
So let me just show you, let's just take a quick little peek into how this is actually implemented.
So if I just jump into this now, the idea is asking me, well, which implementing class of list do
I want to jump into to see this implementation of the sort method?
I'm going to go ahead and just choose array list since that's what we're actually using.
All right.
So here we are in the sort method implementation on the array list class, and we're not going to do
a deep analysis, but I just wanted to share a couple little things with you that I thought might be
kind of interesting to see.
Mainly.
The the core thing here that's actually doing the sorting is this bit right here.
Arrays, dots, sort.
This is effectively a utility method that we could call directly ourselves to do the actual sorting.
And if we hover over this sort of method to get the Java Dock for a moment here, we can see that what
it's actually taking as input is an array, not a list or a collection, but an actual array.
So what's happening here is this method is being passed the actual internal array of our list.
Remember, I said that array lists actually store their data internally in an actual array.
That's why they're called an array list.
And so that internal array is the thing that's actually being passed in to this sort method.
So I think that's kind of cool, along with a few other parameters, such as where it should start from
and how big it is.
So that's just to show you there are even other ways to to perform source if you wanted to, you could
sort an array if you happened to be working with an array because that's what's actually happening right
here.
So that's one little thing I wanted to point out.
And then let's see if I close this and we go back over here to our original code.
I want to show you another very similar, almost identical way of doing almost the exact same thing
here.
In this case, we've got this list and then we are calling an object oriented method of sort telling
it to sort itself essentially right.
But we can also kind of invert that, if you will, and have an outside thing.
Sort the list from the outside in and let me show you what that could look like.
So there's a class called collections, and this is another utility class, just like the arrays class
that we just saw for the internal implementation of that sort method on list.
There's a collections class with a number of utility methods on it.
And one of the utility methods is sort.
And in fact, there are a couple different versions of these sort method.
We'll take a look at this one right here, though, because this one here is pretty much effectively
the same as the sort method that we're already using right now.
So I'm going to go ahead and select that, in fact.
And it takes as input a list as the first input and a comparator as the second input.
So almost identical to what we have right here.
So I could do this exact same thing by passing in a reference to our employees list like so comma space.
And then what I can do is I can actually just grab this lambda expression, and I have to be kind of
careful when I'm grabbing here.
It actually ends with the closing curly brace here.
I can grab all of that command C to copy it or control C on Windows and Linux and then paste it right
there.
And now that is equivalent to what I just commented out there.
That's that's the same thing.
And in fact, if we go and take a peek at how this guy is implemented, you'll see something kind of
interesting.
Look at what it's doing.
It's just turning around and calling list that sort.
So we're passing in the list, right?
And then it's just calling list that sort and then passing in the comparator that we passed.
And so this is calling the exact same method that we started off calling all along.
It's just delegating down to it.
Just kind of interesting to to see how Java is basically trying its best to reuse its own bits and pieces,
really.
So that's kind of worth just making a note of.
All right.
Now I want to show you, though, another way that you can do this sorting and let's see here.
So in order to show you this.
Let me first show you a short little example and we'll talk about it for a moment.
So I think I will show you this example by referring to our undesirables list right here.
So we created this undesirables list.
Let me let me an uncommon at that.
All right.
So here's our undesirables list, right?
And this is just a list of strings, right?
Nothing, nothing else.
Just a list of strings.
So let me show you something here.
So let's say that we wanted to sort this list alphabetically, right?
So let's in fact, let's go ahead and just do it.
So it's a list of strings undesirables.
OK, so hit.
Enter here and we'll do undesirables that sort.
Now I have to pass in a comparator.
Here's the thing, though in this case, I'm not going to create my own comparator.
Instead, I can actually refer to a comparator that already comes with Java.
And let me show you how I will do that.
So I will start typing comparator.
And if I scroll, if I go down a little bit here, you see that I've got access to an already made comparator
called natural order, which just means that it will order these strings.
Naturally, computer natural, which is mostly natural to humans, but it defers in a few key ways with
computer natural ordering.
A string holding the number 10 that is one zero would come before a string holding the number two.
Because in natural ordering, the computer doesn't know that a ten is a 10.
It just sees a one, and then a zero and one will always come before two in natural ordering.
It doesn't perceive the one zero as a 10.
It perceives it as a one, followed by zero.
And that's why something that looks to humans like a 10 in text will actually come before something
that looks like a two in text.
OK, so that's natural ordering.
Anyway, so I can select this.
And then close that, and then I can print this out now, I will just do this this way, system out
that print line, and then I will just pass in a reference, and I think that'll I think that will suffice.
And then down here, I'm going to comment that bit out where we were printing out.
The workers will just not do that for a moment.
OK, so let's run this and see what we get with these undesirables who are currently in the order of
Wilma, Barney and Fred.
OK, so now we get Barney, Fred and Wilma, right?
As you would expect.
And you know what, I maybe what I should have done here is to not sort them in print that first.
So I'll come and take out the sorting and then we'll run this one more time.
Just so you just so I can prove that without that sorting, they would be in this same order that we
have in the code up here.
So let's see that real quick.
There we go.
Wilma, Barney, Fred Yes.
So that's what you get if you don't sort them.
OK, so what I'm basically showing you here is that in this particular case, I'll uncomment that again,
and I will minimize this now.
In this particular case, on Line sixty three, I didn't even have to write a comparator or anything.
I was able to just use one that that we get for free, right?
And there's a few of these that we can use.
I think there's one to reverse yet reverse order.
Yeah.
So, you know, you could reverse things if you wanted to, whatever you want to do.
Right?
So that's that's pretty cool.
So now maybe some of you should be wondering, OK, well, if Java gives you competitors already, how
come we didn't just use it up here?
Right?
And in fact, I'll go ahead and even show you what that would look like.
Compare or dot natural order just like that.
Now what's going on?
I'm getting if I hover my cursor here under the red squiggles, I get a message saying reason.
No instance of type variables t exist so that I employee conforms to comparable.
What does all of that mean?
It's almost like gobbledygook.
Well, there's there's a couple of issues.
One of the issues is the question of what does it actually mean to naturally order employees in the
first place?
Right?
Like, what does that even mean if we didn't write any code as we did here?
How would Java know how we want to sort and order these employees?
How would it know?
Would it?
Would it just assume that you wanted to sort them by the first name or the last name or the date of
birth?
Or what?
Like, how would it know what fields to sort this by?
It doesn't even know what an employee is, right?
That's our own custom made class.
So Java would have to make quite a number of assumptions for something like this to even work right?
And so that's a big problem right there.
How can it know what it actually means to sort these things?
OK, so the short answer as to how this comparator could even know how to sort the elements in this
employees list has to do with another interface, and I mentioned it briefly in the last lesson.
There's another interface called comparable and classes in Java that already know how to be sorted are
able to be sorted because they all implement the comparable interface.
So coming down here, I didn't have to create my own comparator because the items in this list that
I am wanting to sort and order are actually implementing the comparable interface and let me prove that
to you.
So the items that I want to sort here are strings if I jump into the string class.
Like so.
And look at its definition.
Final Class String implements a number of interfaces serialize label.
But look at this implements comparable for string or comparable string.
OK.
And if I jump in to this interface?
We will see.
That it declares one method on it, which is compare to.
Which takes one object.
This is the key to enabling any type of class to be sortable.
OK, so if we want our class employee to be sortable with minimal effort on our part from the perspective
of calling the Swart method, we would need to implement the comparable interface.
OK, so we're going to go and do that, and then I will show you what that looks like.
So let's close this and this.
OK, so here we are now, we're going to have a few issues that we have to work out, and that's why
I didn't want to start off with this.
I've been taking you down a particular path so that I had good excuses to teach you various techniques.
But now we need to actually undo one or two of those techniques.
But I will explain every single thing we're doing as we do it.
OK, so one problem we're going to run into is the fact that right now, this collection is not technically
a collection of employees.
It's actually a collection of I employee, which is an interface, and under certain circumstances,
that would be just fine.
However, that has the potential to mess us up in a few ways right now.
So here's the issue we could potentially allow this list.
Where are we creating it?
We're creating this list.
Right up here on line 34, right?
We're creating this list up here.
We're declaring it to be of type I employee, which is our interface, right?
That interface only has one method declared on it, which is the get salary method, right?
So the issue is that in order for this comparator to be able to do its job, it wants to know that the
items inside of this list are items that implement the comparable interface.
OK.
So potentially one thing we could consider doing is to jump into the employee interface right here and
declare that it extends.
Comparable.
For four I employee, so because this is an interface, you don't use implements here when you're declaring
its relationship to another interface, instead, it can extend other interfaces.
OK.
So that would mean that the method that is declared on comparable with which is compare to would also
have to be implemented by classes that implement the AI employee interface.
OK.
That's what that would mean, however, that messes up something else now.
All right.
So in fact, here let me let me just show this so I can do an override here and just explicitly add
this here.
I don't know why this comes in.
This is part of this is part of intelligence.
We don't need it.
So I'm just putting this here just to be kind of explicit in showing you what's going on.
OK.
So now this would mean that any classes that want to implement the AI employee interface must also implement
compared to right now.
By doing this, this interface is no longer what we call functional functional means.
In this case, that it's an interface that only declares one method.
If it defines more than one method, specifically more than one abstract method, then we can no longer
use this interface with lambda expressions.
And here's the problem with that.
If we jump into the employee class, you may recall that we are indeed using lambda expressions in two
places right here in here.
The way that this lambda expression is working just as a quick review, is that this entire method is
expected to return something of type I employee the interface right.
When it does so, it uses this switch statement to determine if it needs to create a programmer that
implements high employee or a manager or an analyst or whatever.
Right.
But this final bit right down here is a lambda expression.
It's really just a function or a method, if you will, though technically not really a method because
in this form, it's not part of the class yet.
So this is really just a function.
And what ends up happening, though, is that Java will take this function and try to map it to one
method that is defined on some data type that matches this signature.
And that signature would be a method that takes no inputs and returns an integer.
OK.
Now, in order to know what method it can map this to, we need to help Java to infer a data type to
map this to, and the data type that it knows that it can map this to.
In this case is I employee.
How does it know that?
Well, it knows that because that's the only data type that we are saying.
This method returns and Java sees that we are returning something from this switch.
So Java is actually pretty smart in its analysis and things.
It can see that, OK, this is something that you're trying to return from this switch, and that return
has to be something that maps to the return type of this method in this particular case.
And so it can infer that this has to somehow map to this well.
If there is only one method on this interface and if that method signature matches this signature here,
then that's that's easy.
Java says, OK, you have they get salary method that takes no input and returns an integer.
I'm going to map this lambda expression to the get salary method that is defined on this interface.
However, if this interface has more than one abstract method and by abstract, I just mean, it's not
static and it's not a default method, essentially, right?
So if this interface has more than one abstract method defined on it, then Java says, I don't know.
I'm not confident as to how to map this lambda to one of the methods that you have defined on this interface.
OK.
So the interface is no longer said to be functional.
Right.
And and so that's kind of a problem for us.
So what I am actually inclined to do at this point is to say, let's no longer use lambda expressions
here.
The only reason I have this here was just because it was cool to show you right.
And it's a good thing to know.
I mean, it saved us a little bit of typing and everything, but we don't have to use a lambda expression.
You now know two or three other ways to do this.
We could convert this back into an anonymous class.
We could make an enter class, any number of variations of class classes.
In fact, a local in her class or an embedded in her class or just a regular class, right, we can
do it in a lot of different ways.
So I think the easiest thing that we can do here in order to move past this issue is going to be to
just get away from using the lambda and use something else.
Right?
OK, so what we can do is just kind of revert back to a previous version of how we had some of this
code before.
If we go down to the bottom here, you may recall that we actually had already defined a dummy employee
right here, right?
And so we can really just go back to using this guy.
So if we come back up here, what we can do is we can let's see.
We'll just select all of that lambda and then I'm going to hold down on the option and shift, and I'm
going to select this other lambda at the same time so that I can type everything all at once.
And now I'm just going to create a new dummy employee like so.
And voila!
That problem is now solved.
OK, now we still haven't actually directly addressed the issue at hand, though, which is how can
we make it so that we can sort these employees easily?
Right?
That's what we really want to resolve.
Well, now all we need to do is implement the comparable interface.
So there's a couple of ways we can do this.
But I think the way that's going to make the most sense since we want to be able to sort employees using
their last name, maybe even their first name to write it makes the most sense to implement the comparable
interface right here on the employee class.
Now we can do even that in a couple of ways.
We could just directly declare that this implements comparable.
And then we're going to also state that it it's comparable for employee.
So we could do that and then we'd have to go and actually implement the one method on here, the compare
to method.
That's one way we could do it or another way we could consider doing this would be to go back to implementing
the I employee interface because we did already declare that the employee interface itself extends the
comparable.
However, it extends comparable for I employee, which again doesn't give us direct access to first
and last names.
We got to keep that in mind.
Now we could still keep it this way.
And then when we get into implementing the compare to method, we could cast it from an employee to
specifically employee.
That's one thing we could do.
So there's a lot of options here, right?
So I don't know.
Maybe for now, what we will do is just leave it this way and we will just cast them inside of the employee
class.
And the reason I'm thinking this, though, I may change my mind later.
The.
I'm thinking this is because I don't want to have to change all of the places in the main class where
we're currently referring to an I am employee.
And I think we can save ourselves a little trouble there if we just cast it once in the compare to method
inside of the employee class.
And also, we can get rid of this.
All right.
So if we jump back over to the employee class here and we go down to the bottom.
Here's what we're going to do.
We're going to do a couple of things.
First off, we don't need this guy to implement to declare that it implements I employee because it
is extending employee, which itself is now implementing an employee.
Do you get the redundancy there?
So that's one thing that we don't need to do.
Now, one thing that we do need to do, though, is we do need to go ahead and implement the compare
to method itself.
That's one of the reasons why we're getting a few little error messages here and there.
So if I do a control, oh, I've put my cursor down here at the bottom, and if I do a control zero
four override.
There we go.
I'm giving the option to override or implement really the Compare two method right there.
All right, now again, I'm going to just get rid of this jet brains annotation thing here, which I'll
have to read up on what that's all about, but I don't care right now, and it's not it's not part,
it's not a standard part of Java.
All right.
So here is our compared to method.
Now, this one doesn't take two objects, it just takes one.
And the reason it only takes one object is because what you're comparing is this object like the whole
entire thing to a second object that's being passed in.
OK, if that makes sense, right?
So you're comparing this to the thing that's being passed in.
All right.
So what will want to do in that case is first, maybe we'll just want to make sure that the object that's
being passed in is actually of type employee.
Now we can do that manually.
So what we'll want to do here is first cast this oh, to type employee and and I don't think we really
technically have to check that it's an instance of the employee because now we're no longer using that
lambda.
Everything here really, truly is going to be something of type employee, right, dummy employee extends
employee and all of these extend employee as well.
So we don't actually need to check anything anymore in this particular case.
So I could just do something like employee and say other equals and then just cast it.
Like so and I don't have to really worry about a class cast exception occurring in this case.
If there was any chance for that, though, then yes, you would see me doing something like you've
seen us do already where we'd say if, oh, instance of employee, and then maybe I'd go ahead and use
a pattern match here as well and then put all the rest of the code defensively inside of the curly braces
and all of that.
But in this particular case, I'm comfortable that I don't need to do that.
All right.
Then down here, I can now say something like this last name compared to other Typekit last name.
I can just return that now with this implementation, this is just a one level deep implementation,
right?
It's not going to get fancy and then also compare the first name.
We've shown you how you could do that, though in the previous lesson, and you could do the exact same
thing here.
So I'll leave that to to you as an exercise if that's something you want to pursue further.
All right.
So now we've got the Compare two method implemented.
So now if we jump back over to the main class, oh, look at that.
The red squiggly already went away.
So now if we run this code again.
And let's see here now I'm going to go back to commenting all of this out, and I will again uncomment
this little loop where we're actually printing things.
OK.
All right.
So let's run this again.
And really, we shouldn't see any difference from the last time it was all sorted.
There we go.
Yeah.
Flintstones are all looking good.
There's are not applicable.
Right?
So that's what used to be a lambda and now it's just our dummy class.
But it's still, you know, in the correct order, all the way down to rubble.
So very cool.
Now, if we wanted to change the sort, the sorting on that, we have a few options now.
Let's see what happens if we if we call the reverse, let's see reverse order.
Let's try that out and see what it does.
Yeah, it does what you would expect.
It reversed everything, so that's pretty cool, right?
OK, so let me summarize then the gist of what you've just learned here.
The main thing you just learned is that if you don't want to have to define and create your own comparator,
as we did in the previous lesson, you can avoid doing that.
However, the things the objects that you plan to compare have to implement the comparable interface.
OK, and we'll just go take another quick peek at what that looks like.
Again, I'll I'll jump into the employee class.
So.
This class is now indirectly implementing the comparable interface, it's indirect because it's inheriting
the comparable interface via the employee interface right here extends comparable of an employee.
Right.
And then the implementing method is down here at the bottom.
It's compared to.
All right.
Now, since the interface declared that it is implementing comparable for an employee, that's what's
getting passed in here by default.
And so that's unfortunately not quite enough.
We actually need it to be an employee.
Now, if I had chosen to directly implement comparable on employee itself, like, for example, if
I had chosen to just get rid of this interface, which I very well could have done, one of the reasons
one of the only reasons I originally left the the interface in here from many lessons ago was because
we were using the lambda expressions here and you needed to be returning something of a of an interface
type in order for the lambda to work correctly.
Now that I'm not even using lambda expressions, I could actually just get rid of this interface completely
and turn everything back into just returning employees.
And that would simplify quite a few things.
The only reason I didn't do that was because back over here in the main class I have, I am employee
all over the place, and I just didn't feel like wasting the time hunting and finding it and getting
rid of it in all these different places and replacing it back with just an employee.
Again, though, I absolutely could have done that.
And if I thought about it, I probably could have refactored using the ADC to do that.
But that's the only reason I didn't get rid of that, OK, at least for now.
At any rate, though, here's our compare to method back on the employee class.
It's taking something of type I employee the interface.
I am then casting it back to just an employee so that I can access the last name, right?
That's the only reason I need this to be of type employee because I employee doesn't define any methods
that would allow me to gain access to the name, right?
And then from there, I'm able to call Compare two.
And the reason that this compare to works without having to do any further comparators or things is
because this is a string and strings are one of many native Java types that already implement comparable
right?
So you've got strings dates.
All of the numeric wrapper classes implement comparable.
Quite a number of things.
In fact, real quick, let's just if I jump in to the comparable interface right here and then I click
on this little down thing here we can actually see what are all the classes that implement comparable?
Now it's going to be a long list, so we're not going to exhaustively look at it.
But I just wanted you to have some some idea, right?
Like, there's a lot of there's a lot of classes that implement this interface, and that means that
they are all classes that you could sort if you had them in a collection of some sort.
No pun intended.
All right.
So in fact, yeah, there's so many here that my computer is actually kind of freezing up on me as I
try to scroll through them all.
So this is actually isn't going to work as well as I thought it would.
So oh, look at that.
There's like 790.
So yeah, let me just hit escape and get out of that before I kill my computer.
So anyway, you get the idea.
There's a lot of classes that implement comparable.
And you know, it's not a terrible idea if you make domain classes yourself, such as things, things
that are modeling, you know, real world concepts.
And if there's even the slightest chance that you may want to store instances of that class in lists
or in collections so that you can sort them at a later date, it's not a bad idea to go ahead and implement
comparable.
All right.
So that's that's basically all that I wanted to show you for now on some of the key methods and techniques
that you can use for sorting elements in lists.
So one other thing that I'll mention is that there are actually more algorithms that you can utilize
for sorting.
And one thing I want to show you really quickly here.
Yeah, yeah.
So if we go down here back on line 47, I'm back in the main class now, right?
And we're calling collections that sort.
Let me show you something real quick here.
Collections dot.
Look at this.
There's a collections that shuffle.
And if I pull up the Java dock for this look at this, I'll pull up.
The first one randomly permits the specified list using a default source of randomness.
So.
That's actually really cool.
Imagine when we were working on our blackjack game, if we were to create a deck of cards.
And as actual objects and stored them in a list and then call collections, dot shuffle, right, we
could literally have the code shuffle the deck for us.
Right?
You get it.
That's one of the reasons why we put that project on pause and we came here to learn about collections
because in real life as a professional developer, the way that I actually would have continued working
on that blackjack game would have been to model an actual card and then store instances of those cards
in a list.
And then I could use methods like this to easily shuffle, and I could also do it with the race.
But but where's the fun in that?
So, yeah, you can explore more of these types of methods that are on the collections class to do various
things we reverse ordered and we've shuffled and we've gone forward and cool things like that, and
you can write your own ordering algorithms as well.
All right.
So with that, I'm going to bring this lesson to a close and I will see you in the next one.